The IAB is chartered both as a committee of the IETF and as an advisory body
of the Internet Society. The IAB acts as a source of advice and guidance
concerning technical, architectural and procedural matters pertaining to the
Internet and its enabling technologies; this includes both reviewing proposed
new work and providing input to the IESG as well as providing perspective to
the broader community on important issues. The IAB develops and documents
architectural insight and guidance for the Internet. It provides architectural
input into IETF technical activities as well as sponsoring and organizing work
in the IRTF. The IAB also has several procedural roles to support the
operation of the IETF including being the formal channel for liaisons with
other organizations.

Architectural role
==================

The IAB oversees various aspects of the architecture for the protocols and
technical specifications as developed by the IETF, as well as overseeing
activities in the IRTF. While the IAB does draw on specific expertise as
required, it is expected that the sum of the expertise of IAB members
encompasses a broad range of technologies under IETF and IRTF study, and also
encompasses a broad range of perspectives on these specifications, from
research and academic study through development, deployment and operational
experience.

A major role of the IAB is to take a broad and long range perspective to offer
input into the planning and coordination among different areas of Internet
activities, including those of the IETF and IRTF. The IAB, both collectively
and on an individual basis, is expected to pay attention to important long-
term issues in the Internet, to make sure that these issues are brought to the
attention of the groups that are in a position to address them, and to make
sure that the right people within these groups are in contact with each other.
To foster this community-building role, the IAB maintains open communications
channels with other bodies engaged in Internet governance, including ICANN,
the Regional Internet Registries, and ISOC, and provides technical and
architectural input as appropriate. As needed, the IAB works with ISOC to
provide advice and guidance to the Internet community on technical,
architectural, procedural, and policy matters pertaining to the Internet and
its enabling technologies. That advice and guidance are provided to the
public, to the Board of Trustees and Officers of the Internet Society, and to
the larger community as circumstances dictate.

Organizational role
===================

The IAB has a number of roles within the organizational functioning of the
IETF. While these roles require administrative rather than technical work,
they form a large and important part of the IABs activities. All IAB members
need to be prepared to participate (to varying degrees) in these activities.

The IAB serves as an appeal board for complaints of improper execution of the
standards process, acting on appeals in respect of IESG standards decisions.
In addition, the IAB appoints ISOC BoT members as well as a member of the
IAOC, and hears appeals on matters related to the IAOC and IAD.

The IAB is responsible for the RFC Editor function, including appointing and
overseeing the RFC Series Editor. The IAB provides direction for the
administration of the IETF's protocol parameters registries (the IANA
function). The IAB selects the chair of the Internet Research Task Force
(IRTF) for a renewable two year term, and oversees the IRTF's activities.

The IAB has a role in the IETF Nominations Committee process: the IAB confirms
the IETF Chair and the Area Directors (IESG).

The IAB is responsible for liaisons between the IETF and other organizations
that undertake activities that overlap or intersect with the IETF's activities
including other standards development organizations. The IAB appoints liaison
managers to manage these relationships, and deals with liaison matters of an
architectural or general procedural nature. The IAB becomes actively involved
when these liaison relationships have difficulties, for example, in
determining clear boundaries of responsibility. The IAB also appoints a member
to the ICANN Nomcom and a liaison to the ICANN board to represent the IETF's
interests within ICANN. IAB members fulfill the role of liaison "shepherds" to
advise the liaison managers and to act as review point for assessing the
efficacy of liaison activities and the liaison manager's duties.

IAB Organization
================

In order to enhance institutional memory and enable the development of medium
and long term activities, the IAB has organized its work in several areas in
the form of programs. A program is a high priority, long term activity scoped
and managed by the IAB, which can be thought of as an IAB directorate, small
task force, or an ad-hoc body of (independent) technical experts (see RFC 2850
Section 2.1). Program outputs include IAB documents and statements. All IAB
members are expected to review and comment on program outputs that represent
the consensus of the IAB. In order to ensure that all IAB activities have IAB
participation, members of the IAB are expected to actively participate in one
or more programs.

The program leads, who will usually be IAB members, communicate the program
plan to the community, solicit feedback, facilitate activities within the
program, provide oversight and ensure continuity. The program lead will
typically nominate non-IAB members to the program, subject to IAB approval,
will develop the program plan, will organize regular program conference calls,
and will develop consensus within the program for recommendations to be made
to the IAB. The lead doesn’t need to have specific expertise in the area, but
must have good general understanding of the issues from technical, business,
and or policy perspective. The IAB as a whole periodically reviews the state
of the programs and their progress, and makes necessary adjustments and
prioritization. This includes a review of the program membership, activity
plan and progress against deliverables. Current IAB programs include:

- Emergency Services Program
- IANA Evolution Program
- Internationalization Program
- IP Stack Evolution Program
- Liaison Oversight Program
- Privacy and Security Program
- Names and Identifiers Program
- IETF Protocol Registries Oversight Committee
- RFC Editor Series Oversight Committee 

In addition, the IAB chooses a chair for a one year term at the March IETF
meeting, after new members of the IAB are seated. The chair represents the IAB
externally when necessary, and is an ex officio member of the IESG and the
IAOC. There shall be at least two members of the IAB (among the nominated
slate and the incumbents) who are willing and able to take the role of Chair.

IAB Member Qualities
====================

IAB members are expected to act at the "Board" level.

The IAB is most effective when it is composed of a diverse set of individuals
with a broad range of technical skills, architectural perspectives and
backgrounds. For example, it is desirable for IAB members to have technical
leadership experience, operational management backgrounds, research or
academic backgrounds, implementation experience, and experience in other
bodies involved in Internet governance. Likewise it is desirable for IAB
members to have had experiences with differing technical challenges and
requirements, including those that vary by geographic region. It is critical
that IAB members be willing and able to work with each other to develop a
shared viewpoint.

Some IAB activities are very specialized - for example, managing liaison
relationships with other SDOs on behalf of the IETF. It is advantageous for
the IAB when NomCom ensures that at least some IAB members have sufficient
managerial skills to understand the issues that need to come to the IAB by
managing and documenting inter-SDO liaison relationships on a strategic basis.

While it is advantageous for at least some IAB membership to have expertise in
the IAB's current program topics, it is more important for the IAB to have
membership who are experienced in managing volunteer teams, and who can build
teams, motivate program work, and direct one or more programs even in the
absence of in-depth knowledge about specific program topics. The IAB needs at
least some members with program management skills that will facilitate
interfacing between programs and the IAB.

IAB members
===========

- are highly regarded in one or more domains of technical subject matter. They may be recognized in a particular area as being a domain expert, but also exhibit advanced architectural and technical competence.
- are willing and able to apply those technical skills and analytic thinking to understand and usefully contribute to discussions in other areas and to have interests broad enough that they are willing and able to contribute to discussions on new areas as appropriate.
- are willing and able to apply their managerial skills to new areas.
- are willing and able to make introductions among their networks of technical experts in support of the IAB's community-building role.
- are constructive in framing new approaches, technically or in terms of communication.
- are willing and able to work well with others.
- are willing and able to constructively contribute to consensus-based processes.
- have substantial experience within the IETF, and an understanding of its processes and workings.
- are willing and able to commit the time to follow IAB, IRTF and IETF discussions on a regular basis. This commitment should extend to regular attendance at IAB teleconferences and attendance in person at IETF meetings, IAB workshops, an annual IAB retreat, as well as the commitment to review material and generate and edit documentation. This may also extend to leading open discussion forums and active participation in IETF WG and IRTF RG activities.

Time Commitment 
===============

The time commitment for an IAB member averages about two days a week in normal
weeks, and full-time during IETF meetings, retreats, and IAB workshops. Simply
tracking the various mailing list and documents can take up to a day a week.
About a quarter to half of the time is spent on the organizational activities.
Leading a program is an equivalent time commitment to chairing a working
group, and active participation in a program an equivalent time commitment to
authoring one or more documents in a working group. Each IAB member should be
able to commit to leading a program during their IAB term. 

Some positions within the IAB require more time. The typical time commitment
for the IAB Chair is three days a week, and this position may require more
travel. The IAB Chair is an ex officio member of the IESG and the IAOC, as
well, and must devote time to the meetings of these organizations.

Note that the while the IAB Chair is currently an ex officio member of the
IAOC per RFC 4071, this may change in the near future to allow the IAB to
appoint a member whose skills are better matched to the IAOC (see 
draft-hardie-iaoc-iab-update). If this is the case, this appointed member 
will also have to devote time to the IAOC.

IAB members may be tapped by ADs to do reviews of specialized documents and
other tasks, potentially adding to those numbers. IAB members should plan to
arrive at IETF meetings on the Saturday preceding the meeting. Time commitment
during the meeting includes time on Sunday, early mornings during the week,
Friday afternoons, as well as coverage of BoFs during the meeting for
technical and architectural review. An annual retreat will be scheduled for up
to three days in late April or early May. The IAB schedules workshops on
topics of interest from time to time, and IAB members are encouraged to attend
these as well.

